Add post on 2024 developer summit (#238)
scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org: content/posts/scientific-python/dev-summit-2/index.md

Reviewer: Just a really and I mean really nitpicky comment. I typically do one sentence per line for text so its easier to diff.

Reviewer 2: That's a linter thing 😉

Author: Yes! Usually, I do too :)

What I'd love is a linter that is able to break on newlines, but unwrap each line. I've been searching for a long time but without success.

Author: Hey, presto :magic_wand:

Reviewer: Actually if someone does know of a linter or program that does that, I would love to be told.

Thanks @stefanv!

Reviewer 3: Feel free to continue the discussion here: https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/issues/54

- Eric added his [circleci-artifacts-redirector-action](https://github.com/scientific-python/circleci-artifacts-redirector-action) to the suite.
- Matthias brought over his [backport bot](https://github.com/scientific-python/MeeseeksDev) and set up a maintenance team.

### SciPy

Several of the SciPy developers were present, and we used the opportunity to celebrate Dan Schult joining as a core developer 🎉!
Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and a [PR adding newly-supported `const` statements to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.
Eric isolated [a non-deterministic bug in Sphinx](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/12409) that was impacting parallel builds of SciPy's documentation.
He found a work-around that had been eluding the team for months!

### Unplanned collaborations

As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously.
For example, Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography, while Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data.

> Guen worked on telemetry, while Inessa and Sanket discussed community surveys and governance.

Author: could I just make it "best practices for community surveys and project governance"?

### Documentation

Documentation was a much more popular topic than anticipated!

- The new [mystmd](https://mystmd.org/guide) tooling generated some excitement, and an [experimental port of the NumPy tutorials](https://github.com/numpy/numpy-tutorials/tree/mystjs) was made.
- Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.
- Madicken, Paul, and Dan worked together to [extend PyData Sphinx Theme's testing infrastructure](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/pull/1861), by combining Sphinx Build Factory (for generating small test sites) with Playwright (for browser automation).

### SPECs

The Scientific Python Ecosystem Coordination documents (SPECs) aim to improve coordination of technical development across the ecosystem.

Several new SPECs were started:

- [SPEC-?: Dispatching (`spatch`)](https://hackmd.io/yI1iAqekQIq0a4jLS9WPyw)
- [SPEC-8: Securing The Release Process](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0008/)

> - [SPEC-9: Governance](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/323)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [SPEC-9: Governance](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0009/)
```
Minor comment: The governance PR was recently merged, so maybe we should link the SPEC document on the website instead of PR.

- Matthias brought over his [backport bot](https://github.com/scientific-python/MeeseeksDev) and set up a maintenance team.

### SciPy

Several of the SciPy developers were present, and we used the opportunity to celebrate Dan Schult joining as a core developer 🎉!
Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and a [PR adding newly-supported `const` statements to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.
Eric isolated [a non-deterministic bug in Sphinx](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/12409) that was impacting parallel builds of SciPy's documentation.
He found a work-around that had been eluding the team for months!

### Unplanned collaborations

As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously.
For example, Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography, while Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data.
Guen worked on telemetry, while Inessa and Sanket discussed community surveys and governance.

> Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
And with input from Tim and Thomas, Inessa was able to finalize the design of the 2024 scikit-learn user survey questionnaire. 
Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).
```

Author: Added, after moving items to list.

Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and a [PR adding newly-supported `const` statements to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.
Eric isolated [a non-deterministic bug in Sphinx](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/12409) that was impacting parallel builds of SciPy's documentation.
He found a work-around that had been eluding the team for months!

### Unplanned collaborations

As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously.
For example:

- Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography.
- Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data.
- Guen worked on telemetry.
- Inessa and Sanket discussed best practices for community surveys and project governance.
- Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).
- Inessa, with input from Tim and Thomas, finalized the design of the 2024 scikit-learn user survey.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Erik and Dan discussed index compression options for CSR-like nD sparse arrays.

```

---
title: "Developer Summit 2"
date: 2024-09-19
draft: false
description: "Summary of the 2024 Scientific Python Developer summit."
tags: ["Summit", "Scientific-Python"]
displayInList: true
author:
  [
    "Stéfan van der Walt",
    "Jarrod Millman",
    "Brigitta Sipőcz",
    "Pamphile Roy",
    "Matthew Feickert",
    "Melissa Mendonça",
  ]

resources:
  - name: featuredImage
    src: "group.jpg"
    params:
      description: "Group picture of (most of the) summit attendees."
      showOnTop: true

summary: |
  The 2024 Scientific Python Developer summit was held 3–5 June in Seattle. Here's a summary of what we did.
---

This post is a while overdue, but it's been a busy summer for everyone!

> In June, several of us got together for the "annual" (well, we've had it twice now) Scientific Python developer summit in Seattle. Our friends at the eScience Institute were again kind enough to host us. This time around, we made the event a bit shorter: a week is a long time to take off, and it also gets a bit overstimulating/exhausting, given the amount of conversations and work that take place.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In June, several of us got together for the "annual" (well, we've had it twice now) Scientific Python developer summit in Seattle. Our friends at the eScience Institute were again kind enough to host us. This time around, we made the event a bit shorter: a week is a long time to take off, and it also gets a bit overstimulating/exhausting, given the amount of work that takes place.
```

Author: How about: "given the amount of conversation and work that takes place.".  It's a bit of a cheat, but I think we can get away with it.

Reviewer 7: Yeah.
```suggestion
In June, several of us got together for the "annual" (well, we've had it twice now) Scientific Python developer summit in Seattle. Our friends at the eScience Institute were again kind enough to host us. This time around, we made the event a bit shorter: a week is a long time to take off, and it also gets a bit overstimulating/exhausting, given the amount of conversation and work that takes place.
```

This is why, before the summit, we have planning Zoom calls, where we identify topics of interest, which are turned into issues, which are then fleshed out and discussed prior to the event. That way, we hoped to hit the ground running—as we did!

## Topics

You can get a rough idea of what we worked on by browsing the [planning issues](https://github.com/scientific-python/summit-2024/issues/) and the [summit worklog](https://hackmd.io/wsJVTMYdQGG_Zgz7rgxSzw).

Broad topics included [SPECs](https://scientific-python.org/specs/), documentation, tools & bots, [lectures](https://lectures.scientific-python.org/), `scipy.sparse`, telemetry, Array API, and type annotation.

### Documentation

Documentation was a much more popular topic than anticipated!

- The new [mystmd](https://mystmd.org/guide) tooling generated some excitement, and an [experimental port of the NumPy tutorials](https://github.com/numpy/numpy-tutorials/tree/mystjs) was made.

> - A recommendation on [consistent use of backticks was submitted to numpydoc](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.
```

Several new SPECs were started:

- [SPEC-?: Dispatching (`spatch`)](https://hackmd.io/yI1iAqekQIq0a4jLS9WPyw)
- [SPEC-8: Securing The Release Process](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0008/)
- [SPEC-9: Governance](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/323)
- [SPEC-10: Changelog and release documentation](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/321)
- [SPEC-12: Formatting mathematical expressions](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/326)
- [SPEC-13: Naming conventions](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/324)

Some existing SPECs were discussed and improved:

- [SPEC-7: Seeding pseudo-random number generation (SPRaNG)](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0007/)

### Tooling

- We created a new tools team to handle the ever-growing [list of tools we maintain](https://tools.scientific-python.org/).
- Eric added his [circleci-artifacts-redirector-action](https://github.com/scientific-python/circleci-artifacts-redirector-action) to the suite.
- Matthias brought over his [backport bot](https://github.com/scientific-python/MeeseeksDev) and set up a maintenance team.

### SciPy

> Several of the SciPy developers were present, and we used to opportunity to celebrate Dan Schult joining as core developer. Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and newly-supported [`const` statements were added to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Several of the SciPy developers were present, and we used the opportunity to celebrate Dan Schult joining as a core developer. Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and newly-supported [`const` statements were added to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.
```

### Unplanned collaborations

As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously. E.g., Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography, while Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data. Guen worked on telemetry, while Inessa and Sanket discussed community surveys and governance. Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).

### Conclusion

> Numerous other PRs were made, of which a number were probably not even captured in the [worklog](https://hackmd.io/wsJVTMYdQGG_Zgz7rgxSzw). But, besides the inherent satisfaction of working together with this great group, the best features of the summit was that we were able to hang out, bonding over our communal joys and struggles—both technical and personal.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Numerous other PRs were made, of which a number were probably not even captured in the [worklog](https://hackmd.io/wsJVTMYdQGG_Zgz7rgxSzw). But, besides the inherent satisfaction of working together with this great group, the best feature of the summit was that we were able to hang out, bonding over our communal joys and struggles—both technical and personal.
```

> We are grateful to the ecosystem developer who gave up their time to attend the summit (many had to put in leave _just to do more work_!). The summits are valuable, and translate to a lot of work work getting done and decisions being made. We hope that there will be more on the horizon!

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We are grateful to the ecosystem developers who gave up their time to attend the summit (many had to put in leave _just to do more work_!). The summits are valuable, and translate to a lot of work work getting done and decisions being made. We hope that there will be more on the horizon!
```

- [SPEC-8: Securing The Release Process](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0008/)
- [SPEC-9: Governance](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/323)
- [SPEC-10: Changelog and release documentation](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/321)
- [SPEC-12: Formatting mathematical expressions](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/326)
- [SPEC-13: Naming conventions](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/324)

Some existing SPECs were discussed and improved:

- [SPEC-7: Seeding pseudo-random number generation (SPRaNG)](https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0007/)

### Tooling

- We created a new tools team to handle the ever-growing [list of tools we maintain](https://tools.scientific-python.org/).
- Eric added his [circleci-artifacts-redirector-action](https://github.com/scientific-python/circleci-artifacts-redirector-action) to the suite.
- Matthias brought over his [backport bot](https://github.com/scientific-python/MeeseeksDev) and set up a maintenance team.

### SciPy

Several of the SciPy developers were present, and we used the opportunity to celebrate Dan Schult joining as a core developer.

> Matt and Pamphile did some work on the new distribution infrastructure, Dan worked on sparse (remotely with CJ), and newly-supported [`const` statements were added to Cython code](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20891) got reviewed and merged.

Reviewer 8: This last entry (and new-supported `const` statements ...) has two verbs ('were added' and 'got reviewed and merged').

Author: Thanks, fixed!

### Unplanned collaborations

> As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously.
> E.g., Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography, while Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data.
> Guen worked on telemetry, while Inessa and Sanket discussed community surveys and governance.
> Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).

Reviewer 8: `e.g.` is odd at the beginning of a sentence to me. Are all of these lines examples of the collaborations? In which case, should it be a bullet list?
```suggestion
As is the nature of these events, some collaborations arise spontaneously. For example,
- Nick and Ariel explored using Awkward Array for neuro-tractography, while Nick and Mridul explored using [scipp](https://scipp.github.io/index.html) for high-energy physics data.
- Guen worked on telemetry, while Inessa and Sanket discussed community surveys and governance.
- Sebastian and Thomas [discussed parallelization APIs](https://hackmd.io/84thx0ucQ2ab17ZYrBhWRw).
```

Author: I think this is OK, but I'll let others weigh in; let's see.

Reviewer 6: To me, it seems strange to have bullet lists with more than one item in each bullet.  And splitting the sentences further loses the conversational feel of the blog. I suppose we could spell out whatever “e.g.” stands for, but “that’s Greek to me” (or maybe Latin?).  :)  While “e.g” and “for example” are literally translations of each other, the abbreviation feature means that “e.g.”  seems to be used in the middle of sentences rather than the beginning. (We’re not supposed to start a sentence with an abbreviation.)

How about starting with “For example,” instead of “E.g.,”

Reviewer 9: Controversial suggestion, I know, but I feel it so often in many repos that all of them should use the no-bad-latin CI job we have over at the turning way ;) https://github.com/numpy/numpy-tutorials/blob/main/content/mooreslaw-tutorial.md?plain=1#L480-L496

Author: Expanded.

Author: Because the list now got long, the listification happened anyway.

### Conclusion

Numerous other PRs were made, of which a number were probably not even captured in the [worklog](https://hackmd.io/wsJVTMYdQGG_Zgz7rgxSzw).
But, besides the inherent satisfaction of working together with this great group, the best feature of the summit was that we were able to hang out, bonding over our communal joys and struggles—both technical and personal.

We are grateful to the ecosystem developers who gave up their time to attend the summit (many had to put in leave _just to do more work_!).

> The summits are valuable, and translate to a lot of work work getting done and decisions being made.

Reviewer 8: Unless this was here for emphasis:
```suggestion
The summits are valuable, and translate to a lot of work getting done and decisions being made.
```

Author: Added in latest commit, and included you as author.

---
title: "Developer Summit 2"
date: 2024-09-19
draft: false
description: "Summary of the 2024 Scientific Python Developer summit."
tags: ["Summit", "Scientific-Python"]
displayInList: true
author:
  [
    "Stéfan van der Walt",
    "Jarrod Millman",
    "Brigitta Sipőcz",
    "Pamphile Roy",
    "Matt Haberland",
    "Elliott Sales de Andrade",
    "Matthew Feickert",
    "Melissa Mendonça",
  ]

resources:
  - name: featuredImage
    src: "group.jpg"
    params:
      description: "Group picture of (most of the) summit attendees."
      showOnTop: true

summary: |
  The 2024 Scientific Python Developer summit was held 3–5 June in Seattle. Here's a summary of what we did.
---

This post is a while overdue, but it's been a busy summer for everyone!

In June, several of us got together for the "annual" (well, we've had it twice now) Scientific Python developer summit in Seattle.
Our friends at the eScience Institute were again kind enough to host us.

> This time around, we made the event a bit shorter: a week is a long time to take off, and it also gets a bit overstimulating/exhausting, given the amount of conversation and work that takes place.

Reviewer 10: This sentence makes me hesitate a bit; I *liked* the full week format of the first one, and found 3 days felt a bit short. I worry that saying "5 days was exhausting" might make it harder to get funding for a full week if we decided to go back to that format. 

(Also I thought part of the complication was overlapping with commencement --- not that I think we should mention that, but it feels a bit disingenuous to only say "we shortened because 5 days was too long"). Would it be OK to just say "this time was shorter" without explanation, or with a vague explanation like "for logistical reasons"?

```suggestion
This time around, we made the event a bit shorter (for logistical reasons).
```

Author: I noted that we shortened it to avoid clashing with graduation.

Of course, we work together already online, but the event allows us to focus our energies on cross-project concerns (that often fall by the wayside) with planning and intent.

This is why, before the summit, we have planning Zoom calls, where we identify topics of interest, which are turned into issues, which are then fleshed out and discussed prior to the event.
That way, we hoped to hit the ground running—as we did!

## Topics

You can get a rough idea of what we worked on by browsing the [planning issues](https://github.com/scientific-python/summit-2024/issues/) and the [summit worklog](https://hackmd.io/wsJVTMYdQGG_Zgz7rgxSzw).

Broad topics included [SPECs](https://scientific-python.org/specs/), documentation, tools & bots, [lectures](https://lectures.scientific-python.org/), `scipy.sparse`, telemetry, Array API, and type annotation.

### Documentation

Documentation was a much more popular topic than anticipated!

- The new [mystmd](https://mystmd.org/guide) tooling generated some excitement, and an [experimental port of the NumPy tutorials](https://github.com/numpy/numpy-tutorials/tree/mystjs) was made.

> - Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.

Reviewer 10: This may be too much detail / too in-the-weeds, feel free to trim down:

```suggestion
- Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.
- Eric isolated [a non-deterministic bug in Sphinx](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/12409) that was affecting SciPy's documentation builds, and found a work-around for SciPy that had been eluding several of us for months!
- Madicken, Paul, and Dan [worked together](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/pull/1861) to extend PyData Sphinx Theme's testing infrastructure, by combining Sphinx Build Factory (to generate small test sites) with Playwright (to mock interactions with those sites during testing).
```

> - Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.

Author: I split these items: sent Eric's item to SciPy, and condensed the Sphinx testing item slightly. Please take a look!

> - Recommendations on consistent use of [backticks](https://github.com/numpy/numpydoc/pull/525) and [monospaced font](https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/1852) were submitted to numpydoc and pydata-sphinx-theme, respectively.

Reviewer 10: > I split these items: sent Eric's item to SciPy, and condensed the Sphinx testing item slightly. Please take a look!

LGTM!
